# basics

## introduction

- prometheus is an open-source monitoring solution & time series database which provides metrics & alerting with a flexible `Query Language`.

- originally built by soundcloud in 2012 and jointed to `Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF)` in 2016.

- in prometheus we have `Dimensional Data` which identified by metric name and a set of key/value pairs (labels).

- visualizations can be shown using buil-in expression browser or with integrations like `Grafana`.

- it stores metrics in `memory` and `local disk` in an own and efficient format.

- written in `Go` and many client libraries are available

- prometheus collect metrics from monitored targets by scraping metrics HTTP endpoints.

- some monitoring solutions will use custom scripts runs on the server alongside application but scraping endpoints are much more efficient than other mechanism.

- a single prometheus server is able to ingest up to one milion samples per second as several milion time series.

## concepts

- every time series is identified by a `metric name` and a set of key-value pairs called `labels` like `go_alloc_bytes{instance="localhost",job="worker"}` which `go_alloc_bytes` is metric name and `{instance="localhost",job="worker"}` are labels.

- time series data also contains actual data called samples. (number of times a metric happend)

## configuration

``` bash
vim /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml
```

- the configuration can be applied at runtime with a reload in prometheus server

- the parameters are given at start time and in order to change them you need to restart your server.
