# OSI (Open System Interconnection model)

> a conceptional model that formed in the 1980s and composed of 7 layers.

- it's useful to ensure devices can communicate, provides a big picture view of hardware to the software and is useful for troubleshooting.

## layers

here we explain a conceptual scenario to facilitate understanding the layers:

- application: the phone and application to order the pizza.
- presentation: the language of the application.
- session: the resturant has to answer.
- transport: the validation of the pizza request at resturant.
- network: the bike delivery has to know the address.
- data link: the actual path between streets the bike delivery has to go.
- physical: the actual bike and the delivery medium itself.

### 7. Applications

> how application and end-user interact with the network

- some protocols are Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), File Transfer Protocol (FTP), Post Office Protocol (POP), Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), Domain Name System (DNS) and etc.

### 6. Presentation

> It defines how two devices should encode, encrypt, and compress data so it is received correctly on the other end.
>
> here Application data in any protocol is formatted for delivery.

- some protocoles are JPEG, GIF, TIFF, MPEG

### 5. Session

> keeps, create and terminate communication channels calles sesssions.
>
> it can also set checkpoints during a data transfer so if the session is interrupted, devices can resume data transfer from the last checkpoint.

- some protocols are NFS, RPC, SQL

### 4. Transport

> this layer sits between ssoftware and hardware components
>
> breakes session data into segments and reassembles network segments into session data
>
> ensure delivery rate matches recieving device, flow control, error control and delivery of entire message (ack).

- some prtocols are TCP, UDP, ICMP and etc.

- this is port to port mapping

### 3. Network

> it's responsible fpr routing data (discovers the best path) across various LANs and WANs.
>
> it breaks transport segments into packets and data link packets into segment.

- some protocols are IP (v4,v6) and routers.

- The network layer is where routers live in the OSI model.

- this is ip to ip mapping

### 2. Data Link

> establishes and terminates a connection between two physically-connected nodes on a network.
>
> it breaks network packets into frames and frames into packets.
>
> uses MAC addresses to connect devices and define permissions to transmit and recieve data.

- some protocols are switches, network cards and ARP.

- The data layer ensures the integrity of data sent and received.

- The Data Link layer is where switches live in the OSI model.

- this is MAC to MAC mapping

### 1. Physical

> ensure transmission of data over network electrical cable or wireless technology.

- some protocols are Hubs, Blutooth and RJ45.

## Network Protocols

> a standardized way or set of rules for doing something on a computer network (common language)

- we need it in order to communicate in the same language that devices understands each other.

- there are different types of protocols in various categories like secuirity, monitoring and etc.

- common protocols are TCP, UDP, IP, HTTP, Bluetooth and etc.

- The physical layer is where NIC live in the OSI model.

## Network Services

> a program or application on a network that provides service to other devices, programs or users

- we need them because they add functionality that is not there or maybe complicated to use.

- lots of categories like directory services, file services and etc.

- some services are authentication, printer sharing, email and etc.
