# IP

> a unique set of numbers that identifies a device on a network like 192.168.2.15:5986
>
> it's like mailing address so the internet knows where to send your mail.

- started with `IPv4` which is 32 bit addressing and is running out today.

- `IPv6` is 128 bit addressing and standardized in 2017.

## NAT (Network Address Translation)

> it's about public (WAN) and private (LAN) networks and how network teraffic can flow throw this networks.
>
> focus that the assigned addresses are dynamic and subjected to change via DHCP server.

## Port number

> associated with an IP address and identifies an application and service running on a networked device.

- there are 65535 ports and 0-1023 are reserved ports.

## IPv4

- witten in octets like 192.168.14.2

- the first 3 octets are `NETWORK ID`, it's specify the network it should goes to

- the last octet is device or `HOST ID` which identifies which host or devices it specifies.

- the port is not the part of IP address and specifies the target on the device that should route the traffic to.

### classes

1. A: the first octet is Network and the last 3 octets are the Host portions (16 million hosts)

2. B: the first 2 octets are Networks and the last 2 octets are the Host portions (65536 hosts)

3. C: the first 3 octets are Networks and the last octet is the Host portion (254 hosts)

## IPv6

- written to hexadecimals like 2001:0db8:3a4d:0016:0000:0000:1c2f:1a2b

- the first 3 parts identifies `SITE PREFIX`, it's specify the network it should goes to

- the 4th part identifies `Subnet ID`, it specify the private or intenal network of your LAN

- the last 4 parts identifies `Interface ID`, it describes the host or device of the network

## subnetting

> a way to devide larger networks into smaller networks

- makes networks easier to manage

- better allocation of IP addresses in a limited range

- improves network performance.

- for example 192.168 is the network, the third octets are the subnet numbers (1,2) and the last octets are the hosts (1,2).
