# DNS (domain Name Service)

> a key part of any network and the intenet like the `phone book` of the networks.
>
> it's a globla network of the servers that translates human-readable domains into machine-readable IP addresses.

## Terminologies

### Domain Name

> what you type in the browsers for websites or the name after @ of the emails.
>
> there are 4 main levels of domains.

### DNS records

> list of information about a domain like the IP address of google.com.

### recursive nameserver

> the first nameserver that your computer talk to to resolve a domain name.
>
> usually resides into the ISPs.

### Root nameserver

> handlers the recursive nameserver query, there are 13 instance of them in the world and managed by the ICANN.
>
> it's the `.` at the end of the domain names and return the appropriate TLD nameserver to the recursive nameserver.

### TLD (Top Level Domain) nameserver

> handles information about each .com, .org and etc.
>
> it's the `.com` or `.org` after `.` at the end of the domain names and return the appropriate subdomain nameserver to the recursive nameserver.

### authoritative nameserver

> final nameserver in DNS query and holds the IP address of the domain names and returns this information to the recursive nameserver.

- the way we resolve a DNS query is that first we ask the recursive nameserver about the DN (domain name) and it asks root nameserver, TLD nameserver and appropriate subdomain nameservers and at the last from the authorative nameserver and the authoritative nameserver returns the information to the recursive namserver and return it back to us.
