# Volumes

- volumes allows us to store data outside the container itself.

- in stateless apps, when a container stops, all the container data in container would be lost.

- stateless apps can store their state inside external services like databases.

- `persistent volumes` in kubernetes allow you attach a volume to a container that exists even when the container stops.

- volumes can be attached using different volume plugins.

- using volumes you can deploy applications with state on your cluster.

- if your node stops working, the pod can be rescheduled on another node and the volume can be attached to the new pod.

- the kubernetes plugins have the capability to provision storage for you like AWS plugin which provision storage for you by creating the volumes in AWS before attaching them to a node, this is done in `StorageClass` object.

- kubernetes will provision volume automatically when you specify `StorageClass`, then you should declare a `PersistentVolumeClaim` and specify the size (with appropriate storage-class annotation).

## storage requirements

1. doesn't depend on pod lifecycle
2. available on all nodes
3. needs to survive even if cluster crashes.

## PersistentVolume

- think of it like a cluster resource like CPU and RAM.

- it needs actual physical storage like HHD, SSD, NFS and etc.

- but wait, in kubernets we shouldn't deal with actual infrastructure and instead we should declaratively say what type of storage we want.

- in spec section we imperatively define the physical storage.

- also it's possible to have a local storage on the node itself with nodeAffinity.

- persisten volumes are not namespaced.

- depending on storage backend and storage type, the spec attributes are different.

- local volume types violate 2th and 3th requirements.

- PVs are not namespaced.

- secrets and configMaps are some local volumes that are namespaced, they can be mounted into the pod/container.

## PersistentVolumeClaim

- as we mentioned PVs are resources that are needed before a pod can use it, so the k8s admin will maintain the cluster and ensure enough resources exist there and developers request and declare (explicitly) that I want some type of storage resource of which type.

- PVCs claims a volume and we use them inside the pods.

- PVCs are namespaced.

- claims try to find a PV on the cluster that match the requirements.

- a pod can have multiple volumes, you can list the volumes by name and mount them in appropriate locations.

## StorageClass

- provisions PVs dynamically (in background) when a PVC claims it.

- it has a provisioner attribute to provision the PV.

- storageClasses are requested throw PVs.

### process

1. Pod claims storage via PVC.
2. PVC request storage from SCs.
3. SC create PV that meet the claim.
