# Introduction

> an orchestration tool after swarm and, it's a set of APIs in container runtimes.
>
> it will schedulate containers on a cluster.
>
> suppose we are on a machine without docker with containerd or crio or any runtime engines

## what is kubernetes ?

- it's a popular container orchestrator

- it takes nodes and decide how to run container workloads on nodes

- released by Google

- it's a series of containers on top of docker containers and manage multi-node systems, CLI's and configs.

- provides API/CLI (kube control) to manage containers across servers

- many clouds provide it for you

## Containers

- each virtual machine is a heavy OS that runs on top of `Host OS`.

- each virtual machine will be known as `Guest OS` with its own binaries, libaries and ... runs on top of `Hypervisor` .

- with containers, `docker engine` will be running on the `Host OS` and is a deamon that runs processes in isolated environments.

- containers are isolated processes that are capabale to run everywhere.

- containers are kernel level feature which docker facilitate using them.

## why kubernetes ?

- why you need orchestration, you may want a single node

- servers + application change rate => benefit of orchestration

- decide which orchestration? swarm or kubernetes

- some providers are: docker enterprise, rancher, openshift, canonical, VMware PKS

## kubernetes vs swarm

- [good link](https://www.cloudsavvyit.com/10075/what-is-containerd-and-how-does-it-relate-to-docker-and-kubernetes/)

- both solves container orchestrators and both run on top of container runtime

- swarm is easy to deploy, manage and get-started

- kubernetes has more features and flexibility and customization so it gives
us more support and power

- understand your requirements and decide which is better for you

## swarm advantages

- comes with docker

- less complexity, less resources needed

- easiest orchestrator to deploy/manage yourself

- follows 80/20 rule: 20% of features and 80% of usecases

- runs every-where: local, cloud or datacenter and any platform

- secure by default (db, tls, plane channel)

- easier to troubleshoot

## kubernetes advantages

- clouds will deploy and manage kubernetes for you and
it's the first vendor support

- widest vendor and cloud support

- covers widest set of usecases

## setup

### minikube

- minikube + local docker

### kops

- best tool for setting up a k8s cluster on AWS

- it stands for k8s operations used for installation, upgrades and managment

### kubeadm

- other option rather than kops

## Terminologies

### kubernetes

> the whole orchestration system (single or multi server) with all the parts together.
>
> it's like a micro-plugins to add them as a container on top of docker.
>
> it's also called k8s or kube for short and using `cube control` as it's official pronunciation.

### kubectl

> CLI to configure k8s and manage apps, we use it to talk to k8s API.

### node

> single server (master/worker) in kubernetes cluster.

### CoreDNS

> controll DNS in the cluster.

## future of run command

- the goal is that it will be appropiate to only create pods and right now it defaults to crating deployment with warnings and it has lots of generators but they are all deprecated.

- it's intended for use of simple dev/test pods

- before: creates a deployment generator

- after: creates a pod generator so it's intended to use create for deployment.

``` bash
kubectl run my-nginx --image nginx --dry-run
# deployment.apps/my-nginx created (dry run)

kubectl run my-nginx --image nginx --port 80 --expose --dry-run
# service/my-nginx created (dry run)
# deployment.apps/my-nginx created (dry run)

kubectl run my-nginx --image nginx --restart OnFailure --dry-run
# job.batch/my-nginx created (dry run)

kubectl run my-nginx --image nginx --restart Never --dry-run
# pod/my-nginx created (dry run)
```

## imperative vs declarative

### imperative

> focus on how a program operates for example what steps you done when you want to cook a food (precedure)

- examples: kubectl run, kubectl create deployment, kubectl update.

- easier when you know the state

- easier to get started and better for human mind

- not easy to automate

### declarative

> focus on what a program should accomplish for example ordering specific food at resturant (result)

- example: kubectl apply -f my-resource.yaml

- we only specify the end result (yaml content)

- same commands each time

- more ability to set specifications

- easiest way to automate orchestration

## three management approaches

1. imperative commands: `run`, `expose`, `scale`, `edit`, `create` which are good for dev/leaning but hard to manage over time.

2. imperative objects: `create -f file.yaml`, `replace -f file.yaml`, `delete` and ... which are good for small environments and can store your changes in git-based yaml files but it's hard to automate.

3. declarative objects: `apply -f file.yaml` or `dir\`, `diff` which is best for production and easy to automate but harder to understand and predict changes because you don't know the previous state of system.
