# Shell Scripts

- reduce repetitive work and automate the tasks

- normally ends in `.sh` extension or without eny extension

- to get the last application status run `echo $?` in terminal

## Basics Concepts

### shebang (#!)

> sequence can be used at the begining of any scripts (python, bash and etc), this sequence tells the system that the file is a script.
>
> the actual script interpreter follows the shebang sequnce.
>
> the shebang sequnce is needed because the extension to the files are convention and it can be anything.

### comment (#)

> the comment sequence.

### commands

> if you can run a command in a Bash prompt, then you can put it in a Bash script file.

### permissions

> script files must have the execute permission set on them in order to be used

- `chmod u+x script_name` to make the file executable

### parameters or arguments

> items that get passed to the shell script, the shell script acts on these paramertes
>
> each paramerter is positional means that the location of the parameter determines the value of the variable that is assigned to it

## Adding Logic To Scripts

### if, elif, else

``` bash
#!/bin/bash

if [ -d /opt ]; then
    echo "/opt exists"
elif [ -f /etc/fstab ]; then
    echo "/opt doesn't exists but /etc/fstab file exists"
elif test -f /etc/hosts; then
    echo "/opt and /etc/fstab doesn't exists but /etc/hosts file exists"
else
    echo "non of the files and directories mentioned abobe exists"
fi
```

### test

> used to test for various condition

- using `[[ ]]` (2 brackets) allows to have logical operators within the brackets but with `[]` (single brackets) you have to move your logical operators outside of the brackets.

    ``` bash
    if [[ -d /opt || -f ~/derp ]]; then
        echo "OK"
    fi
    # same as
    if [ -d /opt ] || [ -f ~/derp ]; then
        echo "OK"
    fi
    ```

- the `[[ ]]` also allows file globbing and regular expressions.

### ||

> indicates a logical OR operator

### &&

> indicates a logical AND operator

### =

> equal sign conditional expression

### !=

> inequality sign conditional expression

### testing integers

> these are all conditional expressions

- `-eq` equality between 2 numbers

- `-ne` inequality between 2 numbers

- `-gt` tests if one number value is higher than another

- `-ge` tests if one number value is higher or equal than another

- `-lt` tests if one number values is lesser than another

- `-le` tests if one number values is lesser or equal than another

``` bash
if [ $? -gt 0 ]; then
    echo "something went wrong with the previous command"
fi
```

### loops

- the `command substitution` is when the output of one command will be used as the input of another command. there is 2 way to run this `sub shell`
  - `$()`
  - enclose command inside the back ticks \`\`

- using `for` loops

    ``` bash
    for i in 1 2 3 4 5; do
        echo "$i"
    done

    # using commands substitution
    for i in $(ls /opt); do
        echo "$i"
    done

    # commands substitution with seq command
    for i in $(seq 1 30); do
        echo "$i"
    done

    # sequence with step vaule set to 5
    for i in $(seq 1 5 30); do
        echo "$i"
    done
    ```

- using `while` loop

    > do things while is true

    ``` bash
    COUNT=0

    while [ $COUNT -lt 6 ]; do
        echo "count value is: $COUNT"
        let COUNT=COUNT+1
    done
    ```

- using `until` loop

    > do things while is false

    ``` bash
    COUNT=10

    until [ $COUNT -lt 1 ]; do
        echo "count value is: $COUNT"
        let COUNT=COUNT-1
    done
    ```

### read

> takes input from the user or file and applies that input to a variable for a command or script

- `read GREETING` will populate the GREETING vaule by populaing a prompt for user to enter a value

``` bash
filename=$1

if [ -z "$filename" ]; then
    echo "filename has to provided"
    exit 127
fi

while read line; do
    echo $line
done < $filename
```

### exit

> the exit itself returns a `0` to the operating system or you can specify a different exit code for troubleshooting purposes.

- the return value can be examined by `$?`

- the `2>` says to send any standard error to `/dev/null`
  
``` bash
touch /etc/test 2> /dev/null

if [ $? -eq 0 ]; then
    echo "test file created"
else
    echo "test file not created"
    exit 75
fi
```

### exec

> can be used to redirect all output from a shell into a file (or another process) without sending it to the current shell.

``` bash
bash
exec > out.log
ls
exit
cat out.log
```
