# OSI (Open System Interconnection model)

> a conceptual model that partitions a communication system into abstraction layers

## Layers

### 7. application

> an interface permitting users to send and recieve data through clients and applications

- HTTP, POP3, SMTP, DNS, SOAP, ...

- verify functions and DNS

### 6. presentation

> converts the raw data format.

- TLS, SSL, JPEG, GIF, ...

### 5. session

> ability to manage (open, close, keep) a session between the process and response

- LDAP, NetBIOS, PPTP, RPC, SSL, SMB, ...

### 4. transport

> define how data will be send + validation and security

- TCP, UDP, SPX, iSCSI, ...

- verify blocked or damaged ports, firewalls and QoS.

### 3. network

> looks for the path to rach the destination (IP)

- IP, IPSec, ICMP, RIP, ...

- verify assigning and routing configuration, bandwidth and authentication

### 2. data link

> handles communication between adjacent nodes (MAC)

- Ethernet, MAC, VLAN, PPP, IEEE 802.11 (WiFi), Frame Relay, ...

- verify switch and VLAN configuration as well as MAC addressing and IP conflicts

### 1. physical

> handles bit level transmission between network nodes.

- Ethernet physical, IEEE 1394 (firewire), infrared, ...

- verufy physical components

## conceptual scenario

- application: the phone and application to order the pizza.

- presentation: the language of the application.

- session: the resturant has to answer.

- transport: the validation of the pizza request at resturant.

- network: the bike delivery has to know the address.

- data link: the actual path between streets the bike delivery has to go.

- physical: the actual bike and the delivery medium itself.

## actual scenario

- application: what to send with the browser, whether a plain text (HTTP) or files (FTP) or ... to choose the protocol.

- presentation: if we want send a image file in which format (jpeg, png) we want to send it,  or in case of a plain text what format (json, XML) and etc.

- session: the browser will initiate a TCP connection to server + the actual data.

- transport: breaks the TCP requests into managable portions (segments) and applies a lable to protect the ordering and transports the pieces across the sessions.

- network: browser uses IP address to determine if server is local or remote and if it's remote it'll look how to reach it throw the default gateway, the browser create packets and addresses them to the server with its own return address.

- data link: actual packets are structured into frames to be sent over default gateway, these frames contains source and destination IP addresses as well as source and destination MAC addresses.

- physical: the hardware specific connection between machine and network over elctricity pulses or light over network medium.
