# filesystem

## primary locations

- `/` : bottom of the directory tree
- `/var` : variable location, log files and dynamic contents such as websites are often sits there.
- `/home` : user personal files
- `/boot` : any files needed in booting the system is there, also the linux kernel and supporting files are there.
- `/opt` : optional softwares often used by third-party vendors and enterprise environments make use of this location.

## swap space

- temporary storage which acts like the RAM

- it's physical location is not on the RAM so it's much slower than the RAM itself

- older sizing rule for swap space size was 1.5x to 2.0x the size of actual RAM but nowadays it's about 0.5x size of the RAM but not less than it.

## partitions

- the physical disk will be at `/dev` like `/dev/sda` and different partions of the physical disk will be determined by some serial integers after the name of the disk like `sda1` and `sda2`

- the `sd` refers to the scsi disk drivers and removable devices, others are `nvme0` or `xvd` and etc.

- the letter after `sd` (here `a`) is an identifier to the disk.

- `mount point` means taking disk or partions of the disk and mounting them to a directory like `/`, `/boot` or `/home`.

- some partions have the boot flag so the BIOS can recognize and use them to boot the system up.

## commands

### mount

> can be used to mount partions to directories
>
> it can also be used to show all existing mounts without any options.

### lsblk

> used to show all block devices on a system and their names.

### fdisk -l /dev/diskname

> list out partion informations of the specified disk

### swapon --summary

> shows a summary of the swap usage on the system
>
> same information can be found in `/proc/swaps` file.
