# GRUB 2

let's talk about different partition tables:

1. `MBR` (Master Boot Record)

   - support 26 partiotions (4 with one extended to 23 partitions)

   - partiotion size limited to 2TB

2. `GPT` (GUID Partiotion Table)

   - support 128 partitions

   - partion size up to to zettabyte

   - needs `UEFI (Unified Extensible Firmware Interface)` to boot

let's talk about the process in GRUB2 on GPT with UEFI:

1. the `UEFI BIOS` first check everything out.
2. the first 512 bytes of the hard disk is the `MBR` partition which contains the `boot.img`
3. after that we have `GPT header` which let's system to know that it's a GPT style disk.
4. afte that we have `Partition Entry Array` which contains all the partitions listing and ID numbers for theses partitions and where they are located.
5. the `core.img` file is after `Partition Entry Array`.
6. the point with `core.img` is to locate the actual boot partition of the system in `/boot/efi` partition.
7. after that image of the EFI is read, grb is now handed over to the `/boot/grub2`

- `/boot/efi` is known as `EFI` system partition and has to be `vfat` or `FAT32` format filesystem.

- `/boot/efi/EFI/fedora` contains all the image files that EFI uses to boot the system

- `/boot/grub2` contains 2 important files:
  - grubenv: grub environment variables
  - themes

- the default configuration for grub2 can be located at `/etc/default/grub`

- if we need to make a manual change to GRUB2, `/etc/default/grub` is the file used to make a change.

- the configuration for grub2 can be located at `/boot/grub2/grub.cfg`

- individual configuration files that the `grub2-mkconfig` cmd read from in order to create and update `/boot/grub2/grub.cfg` file.

## commands

### grub2-editenv list

> view the default boot entry for the grub configuration files

## grub2-mkconfig

> create or update `/boot/grub2/grub.cfg` file based on `/etc/default/grub` file.

## update-grub

> the `grub2-mkconfig` alternative on debian based systems.
