# init (sysvinit)

- short for initialization

- based off of the `sysvinit(system v init)` in unix systems.

- in init and sysvinit the services started one after another (serial) to keep things simple enough.

- as we said, the kernel will boots up the init system, the default location of the init is in `/sbin/init` and it will take the configurations from the `/etc/inittab`.

- the system will operate at a one level at any time:
  0. halt: or shutdown the init will terminate all the services
  1. single user mode: the root user is the only user allowed to logged to the system
  2. multiuser mode without network: used for multiple user with no network interface
  3. multiuser mode with network: used for multiple user with network interface, default of the servers
  4. unused: in order to sysadmins create a new custom level
  5. multi-user with network and GUI: default of the system with desktp nvironments
  6. reboot: when init stops and restart the system

- telinit 1, puts the computer into runlevel 1, preventing anyone except the root user from logging in.

- in `/etc/inittab` we have a line in this format: `<identifier>:<runlevel>:<action>:<process>` which indicates on which runlevel do what action on which process.

- the `/sbin/init` seeks the `initdefault` of the `/etc/inittab` to start the system in that runlevel.

- The first processes that init starts is a bash script named `/etc/rc.d/rc.sysinit` (in initdefault runlevel).

- each runlevel has some contents in `/etc/rc.d/rc${runlevel}.d` to start and kill.

- the `/etc/init.d/rc` contains all the scripts that `/etc/rc.d/rc${runlevel}.d` are symlinks to.

## flow

1. /sbin/init
2. /etc/inittab
3. /etc/rc.d/rc.sysinit
4. /etc/rc.d/rcX.d (sequential)
5. login

- the rc in names indicate run commands

- more information on [yolinux](http://www.yolinux.com/TUTORIALS/LinuxTutorialInitProcess.html)

## runlevel commands

### runlevel

> view your current runlevel

### telinit

> change to another runlevel

- using telinit is temporay, means if we use `telinit 3` the changes lasts until the system reboots.

### change runlevels at boot

> intrupt the GRUB boot process by pressing any key at startup, then in `GNU GRUB menue` selection highlight a kernel to modify, press 'a' key to add arguments to the end of a kernel line, enter in a runlevel number.
