# TCP/IP model

## layers

### 4. Application

The application layer refers to programs that need TCP/IP to help them communicate with each other.

This is the level that users typically interact with, such as email systems and messaging platforms.

It combines the session, presentation, and application layers of the OSI model.

### 3. Transport

This is the level where data is divided into `packets` and numbered to create a `sequence`.

The transport layer then determines how much data must be sent, where it should be sent to, and at what rate.

It ensures that data packets are sent without errors and in sequence and obtains the `acknowledgment` that the destination device has received the data packets.

### 2. Intenet

The internet layer is responsible for sending packets from a network and controlling their movement across a network to ensure they reach their destination.

It provides the functions and procedures for transferring data sequences between applications and devices across networks.

### 1. Data Link

The datalink layer defines how data should be sent, handles the physical act of sending and receiving data, and is responsible for transmitting data between applications or devices on a network.

This includes defining how data should be signaled by hardware and other transmission devices on a network, such as a computer’s device driver, an Ethernet cable, a network interface card (NIC), or a wireless network.

It is also referred to as the link layer, network access layer, network interface layer, or physical layer and is the combination of the physical and data link layers of the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model.
