# IP

A unique set of numbers that identifies a device on a network like 192.168.2.15:5986

It's like mailing address so the internet knows where to send your mail.

- started with `IPv4` which is 32 bit addressing and is running out today.

- `IPv6` is 128 bit addressing and standardized in 2017.

## NAT (Network Address Translation)

It's about public (WAN) and private (LAN) networks and how network traffic can flow throw this networks.

Focus that the assigned addresses are dynamic and subjected to change via DHCP server.

## Port number

Associated with an IP address and identifies an application and service running on a networked device.

- there are 65535 ports and 0-1023 are reserved ports.
- DNS is one of the most common and important services and runs on port 53.
- SMTP or Simple Mail Transfer Protocol is an important service and runs on well-known port 25.

## IPv4

- witten in octets like 192.168.14.2

- the first 3 octets are `NETWORK ID`, it's specify the network it should goes to

- the last octet is device or `HOST ID` which identifies which host or devices it specifies.

- the port is not the part of IP address and specifies the target on the device that should route the traffic to.

### classes

1. A: the first octet is Network and the last 3 octets are the Host portions (16 million hosts)

2. B: the first 2 octets are Networks and the last 2 octets are the Host portions (65536 hosts)

3. C: the first 3 octets are Networks and the last octet is the Host portion (254 hosts)

## IPv6

- written to hexadecimals like 2001:0db8:3a4d:0016:0000:0000:1c2f:1a2b

- the first 3 parts identifies `SITE PREFIX`, it's specify the network it should goes to

- the 4th part identifies `Subnet ID`, it specify the private or intenal network of your LAN

- the last 4 parts identifies `Interface ID`, it describes the host or device of the network

## subnetting

A way to devide larger networks into smaller networks

- makes networks easier to manage

- better allocation of IP addresses in a limited range

- improves network performance.

- for example 192.168 is the network, the third octets are the subnet numbers (1,2) and the last octets are the hosts (1,2).

## Playground

```bash
ip address show # ip a s
ifconfig # legacy

curl ident.me

# add 10.0.1.101 entry to the web
# setting a static host entry (alias) in linux
vim /etc/hosts

ping web
curl web
ssh web
```

- check availabilty

```bash
# uses ICMP protocol to check if remote system is online and responding
ping google.com
```

## Notes

- We can assign multiple IP addresses to a virtual interface device

    ```bash
    # add IP to veth_ns_dustin device in netns_dustin network namespace
    sudo ip netns exec netns_dustin ip address delete 172.60.0.1 dev veth_ns_dustin

    # add ip with routing rule (thr CIDR notation)
    # the default device (like ens3) is created like this
    sudo ip netns exec netns_dustin ip address delete 10.10.0.1/24 dev veth_ns_dustin
    ```
