# Routing

Moving data from one network to another.

- `routers` forward data between networks and decide which path to use like when you visiting a web page.

- between the source and destination usually sits lot of routers that routes the packets.

- Your private IP is distributed by your local router so it is unique to your device on your LAN so another device on another home network might use the same IP address but you won't know because you can't contact another device using their Private IP on a different network.

- the `loopback` doesn't use the NIC and instead uses `virtual network interface` from the OS.

## Routing Tables

Routers store information about other networks in routing tables.

They get this information from other routers.

## Routing protocols

Routers have their own rules for communication.

These rules are known as routing protocols, this is how they share information about other networks.

- Routers use their own language referred to as routing protocols to tell each other about different routes on a network.

## static routes

The router always use the same path to send data between networks

## dynamic routers

The router change its path of the data packets based on various factors like network congestion, router outages, speed and etc.

## Playground

- show routing table

    ```bash
    ip route
    route # legacy way
    netstat -rn # another way
    ```

- show the actual route taken by the packets to rach the remote host

    ```bash
    # relies on ICMP
    traceroute google.com

    # does traceroute continuously and presents it in nice formatted table
    mtr google.com
    ```

## Notes

- A network namespace (like the default host) may have multiple devices and all the devices in the namespace will use the configured routing rules via routing table in that specific network namespace (for more info checkout the CFS repository with bridge and 3 veth devices in the host namespace).
