# Introduction

A `computer network` is 2 or more computers connected together

## Usecases

- exchanging data (files, programs)
- sharing resources (printers)
- communication (chat, email)

## Network types

- `LAN` : a network that connects devices in a limited area.
- `WAN` : connect smaller LAN networks together.

## Topologies

Describes how devices on a network relate to each other (connects to the switch) either physically or logically (data flows).

in a building with 3 switches, normally the connection of devices to their relevant switch could be in hybrid mode.

- `Ring` : circular network flow
- `Point To Point` : link computers directly
- `Mesh` : connect every computer to each other
- `Star` : a hub in between is the connection node and all computer connects to that hub.
- `BUS` : all computers connected throw a single cable.
- `Tree` : tree shape connection between computers.
- `Hybrid` : mix of above topologies

## Bulding blocks of networking

- `Devices` : every device has a unique MAC address that network traffic can be propagate based on that.
- `Connections` : how every computer connects to the network (cables or wireless).
- `Switches` : a device that connects devices on the network to each other.
- `Routers` : directs traffic from 1 network to another network. (like from 1 LAN to another LAN).
- `Servers` : endpoints on the network that deliver something.

## Internet

it's considered to be the largest WAN and is composed of many public and private networks all over the globe.

## Network Manager

A service that manages network connections on many Linux distributions

- `nmcli` : it's a user-friendly network manager to change and view the resolvers, it gives us the interface name, the IP addresses and the routes and also it gives us the DNS configuration.

```bash
# check weather nmcli is usable or not
systemctl status NetworkManager

# network manager cli
nmcli

# show active internet connections
# list of all network devices can be adgered from here
nmcli c show

# information about `IP`, `netmask`, `gateway`, `dns server`, `dns domain` and etc
nmcli d show eth0
```

## Network Protocols

A standardized way or set of rules for doing something on a computer network (common language)

- we need it in order to communicate in the same language that devices understands each other.

- there are different types of protocols in various categories like security, monitoring and etc.

- common protocols are TCP, UDP, IP, HTTP, Bluetooth and etc.

- The physical layer is where NIC live in the OSI model.

## Network Services

A program or application on a network that provides service to other devices, programs or users

- we need them because they add functionality that is not there or maybe complicated to use.

- lots of categories like directory services, file services and etc.

- some services are authentication, printer sharing, email and etc.
