# Devices

- there are multiple switches and routers between the source and destination.

- cloud networking is a software defined simulation of a traditional network.

## Hub

- not intelligent
- collision domain (simultanious data transfer corrupts the data)
- 1 broadcast domain (transmit data revieved on one port to all other ports)

## Switches

- itelligent device (stores the MAC address information, can send data to a device with specific MAC address information)
- [many collision domains](https://study-ccna.com/collision-broadcast-domain/) as the number of ports (+24)
- 1 broadcast domain (broadcast request will be send to all other ports)
- each port of the switch is connected to a network

- It has many interfaces or ports (24+)

- <https://blog.router-switch.com/2023/08/how-do-switches-and-routers-connect-to-the-internet-what-are-the-configurations/>

### console port

Access out of band data (boot process, bios and etc)

- the switch or router has another usb port to install iso images on the device

## Routers

- itelligent device
- many collision domains
- many broadcast domain
- each interface of the router is connected to a different network

- the router is connected to the internet and is the internet gateway for the LAN

- provide connectivity between LANs (not within)

- the path from the client to the gateway is the default route (includes the switch)

## Firewalls

- can be in sofware or dedicated hardware

- can be front of a router or behind a router inside our LAN.

- control ingress and egress traffic based on configured rules.

### Network Firewalls

hardware devices that fikter traffix between networks

### Host Firewalls

Software applications that filter traffic entering and exiting a host machine like PC.

## NIC

The point of interconnection between a computer and a private or public network. A `network interface` is generally a network interface card (NIC), but does not have to have a physical form. Instead, the network interface can be implemented in software named virtual network interface.

- `loopback inteface` : special virtual interface host uses to communicate to itself.

- the `loopback` doesn't use the NIC and instead uses `virtual network interface` from the OS.

- [Introduction to Linux interfaces for virtual networking](https://developers.redhat.com/blog/2018/10/22/introduction-to-linux-interfaces-for-virtual-networking)

- [physical interface](https://unix.stackexchange.com/questions/82919/what-does-the-eth0-interface-name-mean-in-linux)

## Interfaces & Cables

- RJ-45 (registered jack): connects PC to the internet.

- CAT-5 cable: the cable which is normally connected to the RJ45 jack.

- Ethernet: collection of network protocols and standards
