# Networking Models

## OSI (Open System Interconnection model)

A conceptional model that formed in the 1980s and composed of 7 layers.

It's useful to ensure devices can communicate, provides a big picture view of hardware to the software and is useful for troubleshooting.

### 7. Applications

How application and end-user interact with the network

An interface permitting users to send and recieve data through clients and applications

> some protocols are Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), File Transfer Protocol (FTP), Post Office Protocol (POP), Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), Domain Name System (DNS), SOAP and etc.

- verify functions and DNS

### 6. Presentation

It defines how two devices should encode, encrypt, and compress data so it is received correctly on the other end.

here Application data in any protocol is formatted for delivery (converts the raw data format)

> some protocoles are TLS, SSL, JPEG, GIF, JPEG, GIF, TIFF, MPEG

### 5. Session

Keeps, create and terminate communication channels calles sesssions.

It can also set checkpoints during a data transfer so if the session is interrupted, devices can resume data transfer from the last checkpoint.

Ability to manage (open, close, keep) a session between the process and response

> some protocols are LDAP, NetBIOS, PPTP, RPC, SSL, SMB, NFS, RPC, SQL

### 4. Transport

Define how data will be send + validation and security

Breakes session data into `segments` and reassembles network segments into session data

Ensure delivery rate matches recieving device, flow control, error control and delivery of entire message (ack).

> some prtocols are TCP, UDP, SPX, iSCSI and etc.

- this layer sits between software and hardware components

- verify blocked or damaged ports, firewalls and QoS.

- this is `port2port` mapping

### 3. Network

It's responsible for routing data (discovers the best path) across various LANs and WANs.

Looks for the path to reach the destination (IP)

It breaks transport segments into `packets` and data link packets into segment.

> some protocols are IP (v4,v6), IPSec, ICMP, RIP.

- This layer is where `routers` live in the OSI model.

- verify assigning and routing configuration, bandwidth and authentication

- This is `ip2ip` mapping

### 2. Data Link

Handles communication between adjacent nodes (MAC)

Establishes and terminates a connection between two physically-connected nodes on a network.

It breaks network packets into `frames` and frames into packets.

uses MAC addresses to connect devices and define permissions to transmit and recieve data.

> some protocols are Ethernet, MAC, ARP, VLAN, PPP, IEEE 802.11 (WiFi), Frame Relay.

- The data layer ensures the integrity of data sent and received.

- The Data Link layer is where `switches` live in the OSI model.

- verify switch and VLAN configuration as well as MAC addressing and IP conflicts

- this is `MAC2MAC` mapping

### 1. Physical

Ensure transmission of data over network electrical cable or wireless technology.

Handles bit level transmission between network nodes.

> some protocols are Ethernet physical, IEEE 1394 (firewire), infrared, Blutooth and RJ45.

- The Physical layer is where `Hubs` live in the OSI model.

- verify physical components

### Scenario

- application: what to send with the browser, whether a plain text (HTTP) or files (FTP) or ... to choose the protocol.

- presentation: if we want send a image file in which format (jpeg, png) we want to send it, or in case of a plain text what format (json, XML) and etc.

- session: the browser will initiate a TCP connection to server + the actual data.

- transport: breaks the TCP requests into managable portions (segments) and applies a lable to protect the ordering and transports the pieces across the sessions.

- network: browser uses IP address to determine if server is local or remote and if it's remote it'll look how to reach it throw the default gateway, the browser create packets and addresses them to the server with its own return address.

- data link: actual packets are structured into frames to be sent over default gateway, these frames contains source and destination IP addresses as well as source and destination MAC addresses.

- physical: the hardware specific connection between machine and network over elctricity pulses or light over network medium.

## TCP/IP model

### 4. Application

The application layer refers to programs that need TCP/IP to help them communicate with each other.

This is the level that users typically interact with, such as email systems and messaging platforms.

It combines the session, presentation, and application layers of the OSI model.

### 3. Transport

This is the level where data is divided into `packets` and numbered to create a `sequence`.

The transport layer then determines how much data must be sent, where it should be sent to, and at what rate.

It ensures that data packets are sent without errors and in sequence and obtains the `acknowledgment` that the destination device has received the data packets.

### 2. Intenet

The internet layer is responsible for sending packets from a network and controlling their movement across a network to ensure they reach their destination.

It provides the functions and procedures for transferring data sequences between applications and devices across networks.

### 1. Data Link

The datalink layer defines how data should be sent, handles the physical act of sending and receiving data, and is responsible for transmitting data between applications or devices on a network.

This includes defining how data should be signaled by hardware and other transmission devices on a network, such as a computer’s device driver, an Ethernet cable, a network interface card (NIC), or a wireless network.

It is also referred to as the link layer, network access layer, network interface layer, or physical layer and is the combination of the physical and data link layers of the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model.
