# IP

A unique set of numbers that identifies a device on a network like `192.168.2.15` which is normally assigned by DHCP to device.

IP is the address of your machine on the network

- every NIC can have 0 or multiple IP addresses.

- necessary for Layer 3 addressing on the network

- the `network portion` of the IP will be used for routing.

- every system can be in multiple private networks and one public network

## Port number

Associated with an IP address and identifies an application and service running on a networked device.

- there are 65535 ports and 0-1023 are reserved ports.
- DNS is one of the most common and important services and runs on port 53.
- SMTP or Simple Mail Transfer Protocol is an important service and runs on well-known port 25.

## IPv4

- comprises of 4 octets (32 bits) and is running out today.

- written in octets like 192.168.14.2/24

- the bits in subnets are named `Network` portion and the remainings are `Host` portion.

- the first 3 octets are `NETWORK ID`, it's specify the network it should goes to

- the last octet is device or `HOST ID` which identifies which host or devices it specifies.

- the port is not the part of IP address and specifies the target on the device that should route the traffic to.

### Classes

A way to divide all the IPv4 addressses

#### class A

- starts with leading 0 (ranges over 0.0.0.0 - 127.255.255.255)

- has the 255.0.0.0 subnet -> 16777216 - 2 usable hosts

- private network is 10.0.0.0/8 and loopback with 127.0.0.0/8 (the first octet is the network and th last 3 octets are host portions (16 million hosts))

#### class B

- starts with leading 10 (ranges over 128.0.0.0 - 191.255.255.255)

- has the 255.255.0.0 subnet -> 65536 - 2 usable hosts

- private network is 172.16.0.0./16 (the first 2 octets is the network and th last 2 octets are host portions (65536 hosts))

#### class C

- starts with leading 110 (192.0.0.0 - 223.255.255.255)

- has the 255.255.255.0 subnet -> 256 - 2 usable hosts

- private network is 192.168.1.0/24 (the first 3 octets is the network and th last octet are host portions (254 hosts))

#### class D

- starts with leading 1110 (224.0.0.0 - 239.255.255.255)

- reserved for `multicasting`

#### class E

- starts with leading 1111 (240.0.0.0 - 255.255.255.255)

- reserved for `experimental` use

## IPv6

- comprises of 8 parts of 16 bits (128 bits) standardized in 2017

- written to hexadecimals like 2001:0db8:3a4d:0016:0000:0000:1c2f:1a2b

- the first 4 parts are the `Network` portion and the last 4 parts are the `Node` portion which is generated based on the MAC address of the network interface, also in the Network portion the first 3 parts are for `Global` network and the last part is the `internal` or private part of the network.

- the first 3 parts identifies `SITE PREFIX`, it's specify the network it should goes to

- the 4th part identifies `Subnet ID`, it specify the private or intenal network of your LAN

- the last 4 parts identifies `Interface ID`, it describes the host or device of the network

### IPv6 address types

1. `Global unicast`: internet scoped, starts with `2001`

2. `Unique local`: internal network scoped, not routed on the internet

3. `Link local`: network linked scoped, starts with `fe80`

## Concepts

### CIDR (classless inter domain routing)

The alternative to class IPs and represented by `/` with following netmask number.

- it permits more flexibility in network size over the traditional classless design.

## Playground

```bash
ip address show # ip a s
ifconfig # legacy

curl ident.me

# add 10.0.1.101 entry to the web
# setting a static host entry (alias) in linux
vim /etc/hosts

ping web
curl web
ssh web
```

- check availabilty

```bash
# uses ICMP protocol to check if remote system is online and responding
ping google.com
```

## Notes

- remove leading zeros from each parts

- We can assign multiple IP addresses to a virtual interface device

    ```bash
    # add IP to veth_ns_dustin device in netns_dustin network namespace
    sudo ip netns exec netns_dustin ip address delete 172.60.0.1 dev veth_ns_dustin

    # add ip with routing rule (the CIDR notation)
    # the default device (like ens3) is created like this
    sudo ip netns exec netns_dustin ip address delete 10.10.0.1/24 dev veth_ns_dustin
    ```
