# Routing

Moving data from one network to another.

- `router` is a layer 3 device and functions at IP level and forward data between networks and decide which path to use like when you visiting a web page.

- routing information is contained in a `routing table` and the routing table is a static table mapping of the `best path` to a network destination (lists destinations and gateways for the networks the host belongs to)

- between the source and destination usually sits lot of routers that routes the packets.

- if the destination is outside of the local network, use the gateway but if it's local then don't use the gateway.

- Your private IP is distributed by your local router so it is unique to your device on your LAN so another device on another home network might use the same IP address but you won't know because you can't contact another device using their Private IP on a different network.

- static routes can be used for connections that can't (or shouldn't) use the default gateway.

- example: the 172.31.96.0/20 is the server network and the office network is 10.0.0.0/8, the office network is accessible via a router with the IP of the 172.31.96.2 on the server network then a route would need to be added to permit this host to communicate with the office network using that router.

## Routing Tables

Routers store information about other networks in routing tables.

They get this information from other routers.

## Routing protocols

Routers have their own rules for communication.

These rules are known as routing protocols, this is how they share information about other networks.

- Routers use their own language referred to as routing protocols to tell each other about different routes on a network.

## static routes

The router always use the same path to send data between networks

## dynamic routers

The router change its path of the data packets based on various factors like network congestion, router outages, speed and etc.

## Gateway

The connection going outside of the lcoal network

- We use the gateway to connect anything outside the LAN.

## NAT (network Address Translation)

Method of remapping 1 IP address space into another by modifyng network address information in the IP header of packets while they are transit across a traffic routing device.

It's about public (WAN) and private (LAN) networks and how network traffic can flow throw this networks.

Focus that the assigned addresses are dynamic and subjected to change via `DHCP server`.

## BGP (Border Gateway protocol)

Routing protocol used to route traffic across the internet, it's how the internet works

- it's a layer 4 protocol on top of TCP

## Playground

- show routing table

    ```bash
    ip route
    route # legacy way
    netstat -rn # another way
    ```

- show the actual route taken by the packets to rach the remote host

    ```bash
    # relies on ICMP
    traceroute google.com

    # does traceroute continuously and presents it in nice formatted table
    mtr google.com
    ```

- list routing table and information about DHCP server and Netmask can be found on your router page setting.

```bash
routel
```

- packet (traffic) flow

```bash
tcpdump
wireshark
```

## Notes

- A network namespace (like the default host) may have multiple devices and all the devices in the namespace will use the configured routing rules via routing table in that specific network namespace (for more info checkout the CFS repository with bridge and 3 veth devices in the host namespace).
