# DNS (Domain Name Service)

The service used for discovering the IP associated with a given domain name

It's a global network of the servers that translates human-readable domains into machine-readable IP addresses.

So `DNS host` translates hostnames into IP addresses

- DNS is a layer 7 protocol

## FQDN (Fully Qualified Domain Name)

The complete domain name for a specific host on the network like <www.example.com>

- the computer will send a query to DNS server asking it to resolve a FQDN to an IP address and then looks at the routing table to determine where to send the request.

## Domain Name | DNS domain

The lookup domain for the host

What you type in the browsers for websites or the name after @ of the emails.

There are 4 main levels of domains.

## DNS records

List of information about a domain like the IP address of google.com.

## Nameservers

### Recursive nameserver

The first nameserver that your computer talk to to resolve a domain name.

Usually resides into the ISPs.

### Root nameserver

Handlers the recursive nameserver query, there are 13 instance of them in the world and managed by the ICANN.

It's the `.` at the end of the domain names and return the appropriate TLD nameserver to the recursive nameserver.

### TLD (Top Level Domain) nameserver

Handles information about each .com, .org and etc.

It's the `.com` or `.org` after `.` at the end of the domain names and return the appropriate subdomain nameserver to the recursive nameserver.

### Authoritative nameserver

Final nameserver in DNS query and holds the IP address of the domain names and returns this information to the recursive nameserver.

- the way we resolve a DNS query is that first we ask the recursive nameserver about the DN (domain name) and it asks root nameserver, TLD nameserver and appropriate subdomain nameservers and at the last from the authorative nameserver and the authoritative nameserver returns the information to the recursive namserver and return it back to us.

## Playground

```bash
dig -4 www.linuxacademy.com

dig -4 www.linuxacademy.com +trace
```

- nameserver information

    ```bash
    # generated with network Manager
    cat /etc/resolv.conf
    ```

- finding remote network information (host IP address and the nameserver resolver address)

    ```bash
    # lookup remote host information of the google.com
    dig google.com
    host google.com # legacy
    nslookup google.com # legacy
    ```
